docs/devguide.rst, before:

***************
Developer Guide
***************

This guide is intended for people who want to contribute
to the code, documentation, and test coverage of the core COMPAS packages:

* :mod:`compas`
* :mod:`compas_blender`
* :mod:`compas_ghpython`
* :mod:`compas_plotters`
* :mod:`compas_rhino`

Note, however, that the general procedure is applicable to all COMPAS package development.


Setup/Installation
==================

To set up a developer environment

1. Fork `the repository <https://github.com/compas-dev/compas>`_ and clone the fork.
2. Create a virtual environment using your tool of choice (e.g. `virtualenv`, `conda`, etc).

   .. code-block:: bash

       conda create -n compas-dev python=3.8 cython --yes
       conda activate compas-dev

3. Install development dependencies:

   .. code-block:: bash

       cd path/to/compas
       pip install -r requirements-dev.txt

4. Make sure all tests pass and the code is free of lint:

   .. code-block:: bash

       invoke lint
       invoke test

5. Create a branch for your contributions.

   .. code-block::

       git branch title-proposed-changes
       git checkout title-proposed-changes

6. Start making changes!


Submitting a PR
===============

Once you are done making changes, you have to submit your contribution through a pull request (PR).
The procedure for submitting a PR is the following.

1. Make sure all tests still pass, the code is free of lint, and you docstrings compile correctly:

   .. code-block:: bash

        invoke lint
        invoke test
        invoke docs

2. Add yourself to ``AUTHORS.md``.
3. Commit your changes and push your branch to GitHub.
4. Create a `pull request <https://help.github.com/articles/about-pull-requests/>`_.


Style guide
===========

The command ``invoke lint`` runs the entire codebase through ``flake8``.
As described in the `docs <https://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/manpage.html>`_,
``flake8`` includes lint checks provided by the PyFlakes project,
PEP-0008 inspired style checks provided by the PyCodeStyle project,
and McCabe complexity checking provided by the McCabe project.

The list of potential error codes issued by ``flake8`` are available here:
https://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/user/error-codes.html

The PEP-0008 style guide is available here:
https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/

Note that the maximum line length is set to 180 rather 79 in the ``setup.cfg`` of the repo.


Naming conventions
==================

We (intend to) use the following naming conventions.

1. variables, functions, methods, attributes use "snake_case":
   they are written in lowercase and spaces between words are replaced by underscores.

2. class names use (Upper) "CamelCase":
   The are written in lowercase, with the first letter of each word capitalized
   and spaces between words removed.

3. module or package level variables are in uppercase
   and with spaces between words replaced by underscores.


Quotes
======

Ideally, we would use the following conventions for quotes.

1. Double quotes for multiline statements (``"""``).
   This includes the quotes for docstrings.

2. Single quotes for strings that are used "as variables".
   For example, ``config['param'] = 1``.

3. Double quotes for strings that are meant to be used as text.
   For examples, ``message = "Select one or more points."``


Documentation
=============

The documentation of COMPAS is generated with Sphinx.
This means that code docstrings and general documentation pages
have to be written in RestructuredText.



* sphinx
* RestructuredText
* docs structure
* api docs

  * napoleon
  * Numpy-style

* examples
* references
* see also


Type hints
==========

Type hints should be added to stub files at the public API level
of the main packages (see :ref:`code_structure`).
This allows the type hints to be written using Python 3 style
annotations while mainting compatibility with Python 2.7 for Rhino/GH.

For example, the type hints for ``compas.datastructures`` should be defined in
``compas.datastructures.__init__.pyi``.


.. _code-structure:

Code structure
==============

Each of the core packages is divided into subpackages that group functionality into logical components.
For example, :mod:`compas` is divided into:

* :mod:`compas.datastructures`
* :mod:`compas.files`
* :mod:`compas.geometry`
* :mod:`compas.numerical`
* :mod:`compas.robots`
* :mod:`compas.rpc`
* :mod:`compas.topology`
* :mod:`compas.utilities`

The API of each subpackage is documented in the docstring of its ``__init__.py`` file using basic RestructuredText.
From outside of these packages, functionality should be imported directly from the subpackage level,
regardless of the code structure underneath.

For example, in some ``script.py``:

.. code-block:: python

    from compas.datastructures import Mesh
    from compas.datastructures import Network

    from compas.geometry import add_vectors
    from compas.geometry import oriented_bounding_box_numpy
    from compas.geometry import Polygon
    from compas.geometry import Transformation

    from compas.numerical import pca_numpy
    from compas.numerical import fd_numpy

To allow the public API of the modules and packages contained in a subpackage to reach the subpackage level,
each module should declare the classes, functions and variables of its public API in the module's ``__all__`` variable.
Per package, the APIs of the contained module are collected in the ``__all__`` variable of the package (in the ``__init__.py``).

.. code-block:: python

    __all__ = [_ for _ in dir() if not _.startswith('_')]


Dependencies
============

More nfo coming soon...


Testing
=======

Although we still have a significant backlog of existing functionality
not yet covered by unit tests, at least all newly added functionality
should have a cooresponding test.

We use ``pytest`` as a testing framework.
The tests are in the ``tests`` folder at the root of the repo.

More info coming soon...


.. _plugins:

Plugins
=======

COMPAS has an extensible architecture based on plugins that allows to
customize and extend the functionality of the core framework.

For a plugin to work, there needs to exist a counterpart to be connected to.
This means there are two components involved:

* :meth:`compas.plugins.pluggable` interface: the *extension point* that COMPAS defines
  as the counterpart for plugins to connect to.
* :meth:`compas.plugins.plugin` implementation: a *concrete implementation* of the
  ``pluggable`` interface.

Both of these components are declared using decorators:

.. code-block:: python

    @pluggable
    def do_hard_stuff(input):
        pass

    @plugin(pluggable_name='do_hard_stuff')
    def do_hard_stuff_numpy(input):
        # NOTE: Here use the power of numpy to do hard stuff very fast
        # ..

Once these parts are implemented, the program could simply
call the function ``do_hard_stuff`` and the appropriate plugin
implementation using ``numpy`` would be called automatically.


Why are plugins important?
--------------------------

The example above is just a single code block, but the power of plugins comes
from the ability to split those two parts -the :meth:`compas.plugins.pluggable`
and the :meth:`compas.plugins.plugin`- into completely different files, folders
or even entire projects and still work the same way.

Additionally, COMPAS is able to pick the most suitable plugin implementation
for its current execution context. For instance, one could have two implementations
of the same :meth:`compas.plugins.pluggable` definition, one using ``numpy`` and
another one using *Rhino SDK* and have the correct one automatically selected
based on where your script is executing.


How to make plugins discoverable?
---------------------------------

COMPAS plugin discovery is based on naming conventions. This is mainly due to
the need to support IronPython inside Rhino, which lacks ``setuptools``
infrastructure. For more details, check
`these python guidelines <https://packaging.python.org/guides/creating-and-discovering-plugins/#using-naming-convention>`_.

A COMPAS plugin needs to fulfill two conditions:

* **Name**: The package name should be prefixed with ``compas``, eg. ``compas_cgal``.
* **Metadata**: The package should define a bit of metadata listing the modules that contain plugins.
  This is done declaring a variable called ``__all_plugins__``,
  eg. ``__all_plugins__ = ['compas_cgal.booleans']``.

COMPAS automatically discovers plugins searching over all available packages in the system,
and picks up those prefixed with the ``compas`` word.
All packages are included in the search: packages installed with ``pip``, packages made
available through the ``PYTHONPATH`` / ``IRONPYTHONPATH``, local packages, etc.

Once a package is found, the metadata in ``__all_plugins__`` is read and all modules
listed are analyzed to look for functions decorated with the :meth:`compas.plugins.plugin`
decorator.


Two kinds of extension points
-----------------------------

An extension point, or *pluggable* interface can be declared as being one of two types
based on how they select which implementation to pick if there are multiple available.

* ``selector='first_match'``: this type of extension point will pick the first plugin
  implementation that satisfies the requirements.
* ``selector='collect_all'``: extension points defined with this selector will instead
  collect all plugin implementations and execute them all, collecting the return
  values into a list. An example of this is the Rhino install extension
  point: :meth:`compas_rhino.install.installable_rhino_packages`.


A complete example
------------------

Let's explore a complete example to gain a better understanding.


Extension point
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For the sake of example, we are going to assume that ``compas`` core defines
the following :meth:`compas.plugins.pluggable` interface in

**compas/geometry/booleans/__init__.py**

.. code-block:: python

    @pluggable(category='booleans')
    def boolean_union_mesh_mesh(A, B):
        pass


Plugin
^^^^^^

Now let's write a plugin that implements this interface:

**compas_plugin_sample/__init__.py**

.. code-block:: python

    __all_plugins__ = ['compas_plugin_sample.boolean_trimesh']


**compas_plugin_sample/boolean_trimesh.py**

.. code-block:: python

    import trimesh

    @plugin(category='booleans', requires=['trimesh'])
    def boolean_union_mesh_mesh(A, B):
        va, fa = A
        at = trimesh.Trimesh(vertices=va, faces=fa)

        vb, fb = B
        bt = trimesh.Trimesh(vertices=vb, faces=fb)

        r = at.union(bt, engine='scad')

        return r.vertices, r.faces

Voilà! We have a trimesh-based boolean union plugin!


Advanced options
----------------

There are a few additional options that plugins can use:

* ``requires``: List of required python modules. COMPAS will filter out plugins if their
  requirements list is not satisfied at runtime. This allows to have multiple implementations
  of the same operation and have them selected based on which packages are installed.
  on the system. Eg. `requires=['scipy']`.
* ``tryfirst`` and ``trylast``: Plugins cannot control the exact priority they will have
  but they can indicate whether to try to prioritize them or demote them as fallback using
  these two boolean parameters.
* ``pluggable_name``: Usually, the name of the decorated plugin method matches that of the
  pluggable interface. When that is not the case, the pluggable name can be specified via
  this parameter.
* ``domain``: extension points are unambiguously identified by a URL that combines domain,
  category and pluggable name. All COMPAS core plugins use the same domain, but other
  packages could potentially decide to use a different domain to ensure collision-free
  naming of pluggable extension points.

While developing plugins, it is also possible to enable print output to understand what
how plugin selection works behind the scenes. To enable that, set ``DEBUG`` flag
accordingly:

.. code-block:: python

    from compas.plugins import plugin_manager
    plugin_manager.DEBUG = True

Commit message:

fix typos + add missing part about documentation

docs/devguide.rst, after:

***************
Developer Guide
***************

This guide is intended for people who want to contribute
to the code, documentation, and test coverage of the core COMPAS packages:

* :mod:`compas`
* :mod:`compas_blender`
* :mod:`compas_ghpython`
* :mod:`compas_plotters`
* :mod:`compas_rhino`

Note, however, that the general procedure is applicable to all COMPAS package development.


Setup/Installation
==================

To set up a developer environment

1. Fork `the repository <https://github.com/compas-dev/compas>`_ and clone the fork.
2. Create a virtual environment using your tool of choice (e.g. `virtualenv`, `conda`, etc).

   .. code-block:: bash

       conda create -n compas-dev python=3.8 cython --yes
       conda activate compas-dev

3. Install development dependencies:

   .. code-block:: bash

       cd path/to/compas
       pip install -r requirements-dev.txt

4. Make sure all tests pass and the code is free of lint:

   .. code-block:: bash

       invoke lint
       invoke test

5. Create a branch for your contributions.

   .. code-block::

       git branch title-proposed-changes
       git checkout title-proposed-changes

6. Start making changes!


Submitting a PR
===============

Once you are done making changes, you have to submit your contribution through a pull request (PR).
The procedure for submitting a PR is the following.

1. Make sure all tests still pass, the code is free of lint, and the docstrings compile correctly:

   .. code-block:: bash

        invoke lint
        invoke test
        invoke docs

2. Add yourself to ``AUTHORS.md``.
3. Summarize the changes you made in ``CHANGELOG.md``.
4. Commit your changes and push your branch to GitHub.
5. Create a `pull request <https://help.github.com/articles/about-pull-requests/>`_.


Style guide
===========

The command ``invoke lint`` runs the entire codebase through ``flake8``.
As described in the `docs <https://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/manpage.html>`_,
``flake8`` includes lint checks provided by the PyFlakes project,
PEP-0008 inspired style checks provided by the PyCodeStyle project,
and McCabe complexity checking provided by the McCabe project.

The list of potential error codes issued by ``flake8`` are available here:
https://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/user/error-codes.html

The PEP-0008 style guide is available here:
https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/

Note that the maximum line length is set to 180 rather 79 in the ``setup.cfg`` of the repo.


Naming conventions
==================

We (intend to) use the following naming conventions.

1. variables, functions, methods, attributes use "snake_case":
   they are written in lowercase and spaces between words are replaced by underscores.

2. class names use (Upper) "CamelCase":
   The are written in lowercase, with the first letter of each word capitalized
   and spaces between words removed.

3. module or package level variables are in uppercase
   and with spaces between words replaced by underscores.


Quotes
======

Ideally, we would use the following conventions for quotes.

1. Double quotation marks for multiline statements and docstrings.
   For example, ``"""Calculate the sum of two numbers."""``

2. Single quotation marks for strings that are used "as variables".
   For example, ``config['param'] = 1``.

3. Double quotation marks for strings that are meant to be used as text.
   For examples, ``message = "Select one or more points."``


Documentation
=============

The documentation of COMPAS is generated with Sphinx.
This means that code docstrings and general documentation pages
have to be written in RestructuredText.

Each function, method, and class should have a docstring describing its behaviour.
We use ``sphinx.ext.napoleon`` to allow for human-readable docstrings,
and prefer Numpy-style docstring formatting rules.

* https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/napoleon.html
* https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/format.html

To include a new function or class in the documentation,
it should be added to the API docstring in ``__init__.py`` of the main package it belongs to.

For example, if you add a function somewhere in the geometry package,
make sure to include it in the docstring of ``compas.geometry.__init__.py``.


Type hints
==========

Type hints should be added to stub files at the public API level
of the main packages (see :ref:`code_structure`).
This allows the type hints to be written using Python 3 style
annotations while maintaining compatibility with Python 2.7 for Rhino/GH.

For example, the type hints for ``compas.datastructures`` should be defined in
``compas.datastructures.__init__.pyi``.


.. _code-structure:

Code structure
==============

Each of the core packages is divided into subpackages that group functionality into logical components.
For example, :mod:`compas` is divided into:

* :mod:`compas.datastructures`
* :mod:`compas.files`
* :mod:`compas.geometry`
* :mod:`compas.numerical`
* :mod:`compas.robots`
* :mod:`compas.rpc`
* :mod:`compas.topology`
* :mod:`compas.utilities`

The API of each subpackage is documented in the docstring of its ``__init__.py`` file using basic RestructuredText.
From outside of these packages, functionality should be imported directly from the subpackage level,
regardless of the code structure underneath.

For example, in some ``script.py``:

.. code-block:: python

    from compas.datastructures import Mesh
    from compas.datastructures import Network

    from compas.geometry import add_vectors
    from compas.geometry import oriented_bounding_box_numpy
    from compas.geometry import Polygon
    from compas.geometry import Transformation

    from compas.numerical import pca_numpy
    from compas.numerical import fd_numpy

To allow the public API of the modules and packages contained in a subpackage to reach the subpackage level,
each module should declare the classes, functions and variables of its public API in the module's ``__all__`` variable.
Per package, the APIs of the contained module are collected in the ``__all__`` variable of the package (in the ``__init__.py``).

.. code-block:: python

    __all__ = [_ for _ in dir() if not _.startswith('_')]


Dependencies
============

More info coming soon...


Testing
=======

Although we still have a significant backlog of existing functionality
not yet covered by unit tests, at least all newly added functionality
should have a corresponding test.

We use ``pytest`` as a testing framework.
The tests are in the ``tests`` folder at the root of the repo.

More info coming soon...


.. _plugins:

Plugins
=======

COMPAS has an extensible architecture based on plugins that allows to
customize and extend the functionality of the core framework.

For a plugin to work, there needs to exist a counterpart to be connected to.
This means there are two components involved:

* :meth:`compas.plugins.pluggable` interface: the *extension point* that COMPAS defines
  as the counterpart for plugins to connect to.
* :meth:`compas.plugins.plugin` implementation: a *concrete implementation* of the
  ``pluggable`` interface.

Both of these components are declared using decorators:

.. code-block:: python

    @pluggable
    def do_hard_stuff(input):
        pass

    @plugin(pluggable_name='do_hard_stuff')
    def do_hard_stuff_numpy(input):
        # NOTE: Here use the power of numpy to do hard stuff very fast
        # ..

Once these parts are implemented, the program could simply
call the function ``do_hard_stuff`` and the appropriate plugin
implementation using ``numpy`` would be called automatically.


Why are plugins important?
--------------------------

The example above is just a single code block, but the power of plugins comes
from the ability to split those two parts -the :meth:`compas.plugins.pluggable`
and the :meth:`compas.plugins.plugin`- into completely different files, folders
or even entire projects and still work the same way.

Additionally, COMPAS is able to pick the most suitable plugin implementation
for its current execution context. For instance, one could have two implementations
of the same :meth:`compas.plugins.pluggable` definition, one using ``numpy`` and
another one using *Rhino SDK* and have the correct one automatically selected
based on where your script is executing.


How to make plugins discoverable?
---------------------------------

COMPAS plugin discovery is based on naming conventions. This is mainly due to
the need to support IronPython inside Rhino, which lacks ``setuptools``
infrastructure. For more details, check
`these python guidelines <https://packaging.python.org/guides/creating-and-discovering-plugins/#using-naming-convention>`_.

A COMPAS plugin needs to fulfill two conditions:

* **Name**: The package name should be prefixed with ``compas``, eg. ``compas_cgal``.
* **Metadata**: The package should define a bit of metadata listing the modules that contain plugins.
  This is done declaring a variable called ``__all_plugins__``,
  eg. ``__all_plugins__ = ['compas_cgal.booleans']``.

COMPAS automatically discovers plugins searching over all available packages in the system,
and picks up those prefixed with the ``compas`` word.
All packages are included in the search: packages installed with ``pip``, packages made
available through the ``PYTHONPATH`` / ``IRONPYTHONPATH``, local packages, etc.

Once a package is found, the metadata in ``__all_plugins__`` is read and all modules
listed are analyzed to look for functions decorated with the :meth:`compas.plugins.plugin`
decorator.


Two kinds of extension points
-----------------------------

An extension point, or *pluggable* interface can be declared as being one of two types
based on how they select which implementation to pick if there are multiple available.

* ``selector='first_match'``: this type of extension point will pick the first plugin
  implementation that satisfies the requirements.
* ``selector='collect_all'``: extension points defined with this selector will instead
  collect all plugin implementations and execute them all, collecting the return
  values into a list. An example of this is the Rhino install extension
  point: :meth:`compas_rhino.install.installable_rhino_packages`.


A complete example
------------------

Let's explore a complete example to gain a better understanding.


Extension point
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For the sake of example, we are going to assume that ``compas`` core defines
the following :meth:`compas.plugins.pluggable` interface in

**compas/geometry/booleans/__init__.py**

.. code-block:: python

    @pluggable(category='booleans')
    def boolean_union_mesh_mesh(A, B):
        pass


Plugin
^^^^^^

Now let's write a plugin that implements this interface:

**compas_plugin_sample/__init__.py**

.. code-block:: python

    __all_plugins__ = ['compas_plugin_sample.boolean_trimesh']


**compas_plugin_sample/boolean_trimesh.py**

.. code-block:: python

    import trimesh

    @plugin(category='booleans', requires=['trimesh'])
    def boolean_union_mesh_mesh(A, B):
        va, fa = A
        at = trimesh.Trimesh(vertices=va, faces=fa)

        vb, fb = B
        bt = trimesh.Trimesh(vertices=vb, faces=fb)

        r = at.union(bt, engine='scad')

        return r.vertices, r.faces

Voilà! We have a trimesh-based boolean union plugin!


Advanced options
----------------

There are a few additional options that plugins can use:

* ``requires``: List of required python modules. COMPAS will filter out plugins if their
  requirements list is not satisfied at runtime. This allows to have multiple implementations
  of the same operation and have them selected based on which packages are installed.
  on the system. Eg. `requires=['scipy']`.
* ``tryfirst`` and ``trylast``: Plugins cannot control the exact priority they will have
  but they can indicate whether to try to prioritize them or demote them as fallback using
  these two boolean parameters.
* ``pluggable_name``: Usually, the name of the decorated plugin method matches that of the
  pluggable interface. When that is not the case, the pluggable name can be specified via
  this parameter.
* ``domain``: extension points are unambiguously identified by a URL that combines domain,
  category and pluggable name. All COMPAS core plugins use the same domain, but other
  packages could potentially decide to use a different domain to ensure collision-free
  naming of pluggable extension points.

While developing plugins, it is also possible to enable print output to understand what
how plugin selection works behind the scenes. To enable that, set ``DEBUG`` flag
accordingly:

.. code-block:: python

    from compas.plugins import plugin_manager
    plugin_manager.DEBUG = True
