docs/tutorial/robots.rst, before:

.. _robots:

******
Robots
******

.. highlight:: python

COMPAS provides several fundamental structures and features that simplify working
with robots models, kinematic chains and coordinate frames. On top of this,
the `COMPAS FAB <https://gramaziokohler.github.io/compas_fab/latest/>`_ extension
package provides additional functionality to connect these models with planning
and execution tools and libraries.

Coordinate frames
=================

.. currentmodule:: compas.geometry

One of the most basic concepts related to robotics that COMPAS provides are
coordinate frames, which are described using the :class:`compas.geometry.Frame` class.

In any robotic setup, there exist multiple coordinate frames, and each one is defined
in relation to the next. Examples of typical coordinate frames are:

* World coordinate frame (``WCF``)
* Robot coordinate frame (``RCF``)
* Tool0 coordinate frame (``T0CF``)
* Tool coordinate frame (``TCF``)
* Object coordinate frame (``OCF``)

.. figure:: files/coordinate_frames.jpg
    :figclass: figure
    :class: figure-img img-fluid

    Coordinate frame convention of a robotic setup.

A coordinate frame is defined as a point and two orthonormal base vectors
(``xaxis``, ``yaxis``). Both the point and the vectors can be defined
using simple lists of XYZ components or using classes. Frames are
right-handed coordinate systems. The following two examples are equivalent:

::

    >>> from compas.geometry import Frame, Point, Vector

::

    >>> frame = Frame([0, 0, 0], [1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0])
    >>> frame.point
    Point(0.000, 0.000, 0.000)

    >>> frame = Frame(Point(0, 0, 0), Vector(1, 0, 0), Vector(0, 1, 0))
    >>> frame.point
    Point(0.000, 0.000, 0.000)

There are shorthand constructors for the frames located at ``(0.0, 0.0, 0.0)``::

    >>> f1 = Frame.worldXY()
    >>> f2 = Frame.worldYZ()
    >>> f3 = Frame.worldZX()

And there are additional constructors to create coordinate frames
from alternative representations such as::

    >>> f4 = Frame.from_axis_angle_vector([0, 0, 0], point=[0, 0, 0])
    >>> f5 = Frame.from_points([0, 0, 0], [1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0])
    >>> f6 = Frame.from_quaternion([1, 0, 0, 0], point=[0, 0, 0])

The relationship between coordinate frames is expressed as a
:class:`compas.geometry.Transformation` between the two, for example:

::

    >>> from compas.geometry import Transformation

::

    >>> f1 = Frame([15, 15, 15], [0, 1, 0], [0, 0, 1])
    >>> f2 = Frame.worldXY()
    >>> t = Transformation.from_frame_to_frame(f1, f2)
    Transformation([[0.0, 1.0, 0.0, -15.0], [0.0, 0.0, 1.0, -15.0], [1.0, 0.0, 0.0, -15.0], [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0]])

A very common need is to describe the position and rotation of a object
(eg. point, vector, mesh, etc.) in relation to its local coordinate frame,
and then transform it to the world coordinate frame, and vice versa.
These operations are simplified with the methods ``to_local_coordinates``
and ``to_world_coordinates`` of frames::

    >>> f1 = Frame([130, 25, 80], [1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0])
    >>> local_point = Point(10, 10, 10)
    >>> f1.to_world_coordinates(local_point)
    Point(140.000, 35.000, 90.000)

Conversely, an object defined in world coordinate frame can be transformed to
a local coordinate frame using the ``to_local_coordinates`` method::

    >>> p = Point(10, 10, 10)
    >>> f1 = Frame([130, 25, 80], [1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0])
    >>> f1.to_local_coordinates(p)
    Point(-120.000, -15.000, -70.000)

Robot models
============

Robotic arms, like those typically used in digital fabrication, are fundamentally
kinematic chains of rigid bodies, i.e. **links**, connected by **joints** to
provide constrained motion. Kinematics is a subdomain of mechanics, and contrary
to dynamics, it concerns the laws of motion without considering forces.

A robot model is a set of links and joints that form a tree structure where each
joint has a coordinate frame around which it rotates or translates, depending
on the joint type.

COMPAS supports robot models defined in a standard robot description format
called ``URDF``, which originates in the ROS community.

Links
-----

Links are the rigid bodies in a robot model. They can have zero or more
geometries associated. Associated geometry can serve visual or collision purposes.
Collision geometry is generally a simplified version of visual geometry to speed up
the collision checking process.

Joints
------

Joints are the connecting elements between links. There are four main types
of joints:

* **Revolute**: A hinge joint that rotates along the axis and has a limited
  range specified by the upper and lower limits.
* **Continuous**: A hinge joint that rotates along the axis and has no limits.
* **Prismatic**: A sliding joint that slides along the axis, and has a limited
  range specified by the upper and lower limits.
* **Fixed**: Not really a joint because it cannot move, all degrees of freedom
  are locked.

Building robots models
======================

Robot models are represented by the :class:`compas.robots.RobotModel` class.
There are various ways to construct a robot model. The following snippet
shows how to construct one programmatically:

::

    >>> from compas.robots import Joint, Link, RobotModel

::

    >>> j1 = Joint('joint_1', 'revolute', parent='base', child='link_1')
    >>> j2 = Joint('joint_2', 'revolute', parent='link_1', child='link_2')
    >>> j3 = Joint('joint_3', 'revolute', parent='link_2', child='link_3')
    >>> j4 = Joint('joint_4', 'revolute', parent='link_3', child='link_4')
    >>> j5 = Joint('joint_5', 'revolute', parent='link_4', child='link_5')
    >>> j6 = Joint('joint_6', 'revolute', parent='link_5', child='link_6')
    >>> l0 = Link('base')
    >>> l1 = Link('link_1')
    >>> l2 = Link('link_2')
    >>> l3 = Link('link_3')
    >>> l4 = Link('link_4')
    >>> l5 = Link('link_5')
    >>> l6 = Link('link_6')
    >>> links = [l0, l1, l2, l3, l4, l5, l6]
    >>> joints = [j1, j2, j3, j4, j5, j6]
    >>> robot = RobotModel('johnny-5', joints=joints, links=links)
    >>> robot.get_configurable_joint_names()
    ['joint_1', 'joint_2', 'joint_3', 'joint_4', 'joint_5', 'joint_6']

This approach can end up being very verbose, so the methods ``add_link``
and ``add_joint`` of :class:`compas.robots.RobotModel` offer an alternative that
significantly reduces the amount of code required:

::

    >>> from compas.geometry import Box, Frame
    >>> from compas.datastructures import Mesh
    >>> from compas.robots import Joint, Link, RobotModel

::

    >>> length, width, axis = 5, 0.4, (0, 0, 1)
    >>> box = Box.from_diagonal([(0, width / -2, width / -2), (length, width / 2, width / 2)])
    >>> robot = RobotModel('bender')
    >>> link_last = robot.add_link('world')
    >>> robot.name
    'bender'

    >>> for i in range(6):
    ...     visual_mesh = Mesh.from_shape(box)
    ...     origin = Frame.from_quaternion((1, 0, 0, 0), point=(length, 0, 0))
    ...     link = robot.add_link('link_{}'.format(i), visual_mesh)
    ...     robot.add_joint('joint_{}'.format(i), Joint.CONTINUOUS, link_last, link, origin, axis)
    ...     link_last = link
    ...
    >>> robot.get_configurable_joint_names()
    ['joint_0', 'joint_1', 'joint_2', 'joint_3', 'joint_4', 'joint_5']

However, more often than not, robot models are loaded from URDF files instead of being
defined programmatically. To load a URDF into a robot model, use the
``from_urdf_file`` method::

    >>> model = RobotModel.from_urdf_file('ur5.urdf')
    >>> print(model)

Since a large number of robot models defined in URDF are available on Github,
there are specialized loaders that allow loading an entire model including
its linked geometry directly from a Github repository:

::

    >>> import compas
    >>> from compas.robots import GithubPackageMeshLoader
    >>> from compas.robots import RobotModel

::

    >>> # Set high precision to import meshes defined in meters
    >>> compas.PRECISION = '12f'
    >>> github = GithubPackageMeshLoader('ros-industrial/abb', 'abb_irb6600_support', 'kinetic-devel')
    >>> model = RobotModel.from_urdf_file(github.load_urdf('irb6640.urdf'))
    >>> model.load_geometry(github)
    >>> print(model)
    Robot name=abb_irb6640, Links=11, Joints=10 (6 configurable)

Another common scenario is to load robot models from a running ROS system.
`ROS (Robot Operating System) <https://www.ros.org/>`_ is a very complex and
mature tool, and its setup is beyond the scope of this tutorial, but
an overview of some of the installation options is available
`here <https://gramaziokohler.github.io/compas_fab/latest/backends/ros.html>`_.
Once ROS is configured on your system, the most convenient way to load the
robot model is to use **COMPAS FAB** and its ROS integration.
The following snippet shows how to load the robot model currently active in ROS:

::

    >>> from compas_fab.backends import RosClient

::

    >>> with RosClient() as ros:
    ...    robot = ros.load_robot(load_geometry=True)
    ...    print(robot.model)

FK, IK & Path Planning
======================

Robot models are the base for a large number of additional features that are
provided via extension packages. In particular, features such as
forward and inverse kinematic solvers and path planning are built on top of
these robot models, but are integrated into
`COMPAS FAB <https://gramaziokohler.github.io/compas_fab/latest/>`_.

For further details about these features, check the detailed examples in
COMPAS FAB documentation.

Commit message:

fix attach_tool_model, docs

docs/tutorial/robots.rst, after:

.. _robots:

******
Robots
******

.. highlight:: python

COMPAS provides several fundamental structures and features that simplify working
with robots models, kinematic chains and coordinate frames. On top of this,
the `COMPAS FAB <https://gramaziokohler.github.io/compas_fab/latest/>`_ extension
package provides additional functionality to connect these models with planning
and execution tools and libraries.

Coordinate frames
=================

.. currentmodule:: compas.geometry

One of the most basic concepts related to robotics that COMPAS provides are
coordinate frames, which are described using the :class:`compas.geometry.Frame` class.

In any robotic setup, there exist multiple coordinate frames, and each one is defined
in relation to the next. Examples of typical coordinate frames are:

* World coordinate frame (``WCF``)
* Robot coordinate frame (``RCF``)
* Tool0 coordinate frame (``T0CF``)
* Tool coordinate frame (``TCF``)
* Object coordinate frame (``OCF``)

.. figure:: files/coordinate_frames.jpg
    :figclass: figure
    :class: figure-img img-fluid

    Coordinate frame convention of a robotic setup.

A coordinate frame is defined as a point and two orthonormal base vectors
(``xaxis``, ``yaxis``). Both the point and the vectors can be defined
using simple lists of XYZ components or using classes. Frames are
right-handed coordinate systems. The following two examples are equivalent:

::

    >>> from compas.geometry import Frame, Point, Vector

::

    >>> frame = Frame([0, 0, 0], [1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0])
    >>> frame.point
    Point(0.000, 0.000, 0.000)

    >>> frame = Frame(Point(0, 0, 0), Vector(1, 0, 0), Vector(0, 1, 0))
    >>> frame.point
    Point(0.000, 0.000, 0.000)

There are shorthand constructors for the frames located at ``(0.0, 0.0, 0.0)``::

    >>> f1 = Frame.worldXY()
    >>> f2 = Frame.worldYZ()
    >>> f3 = Frame.worldZX()

And there are additional constructors to create coordinate frames
from alternative representations such as::

    >>> f4 = Frame.from_axis_angle_vector([0, 0, 0], point=[0, 0, 0])
    >>> f5 = Frame.from_points([0, 0, 0], [1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0])
    >>> f6 = Frame.from_quaternion([1, 0, 0, 0], point=[0, 0, 0])

The relationship between coordinate frames is expressed as a
:class:`compas.geometry.Transformation` between the two, for example:

::

    >>> from compas.geometry import Transformation

::

    >>> f1 = Frame([15, 15, 15], [0, 1, 0], [0, 0, 1])
    >>> f2 = Frame.worldXY()
    >>> t = Transformation.from_frame_to_frame(f1, f2)
    Transformation([[0.0, 1.0, 0.0, -15.0], [0.0, 0.0, 1.0, -15.0], [1.0, 0.0, 0.0, -15.0], [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0]])

A very common need is to describe the position and rotation of a object
(eg. point, vector, mesh, etc.) in relation to its local coordinate frame,
and then transform it to the world coordinate frame, and vice versa.
These operations are simplified with the methods ``to_local_coordinates``
and ``to_world_coordinates`` of frames::

    >>> f1 = Frame([130, 25, 80], [1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0])
    >>> local_point = Point(10, 10, 10)
    >>> f1.to_world_coordinates(local_point)
    Point(140.000, 35.000, 90.000)

Conversely, an object defined in world coordinate frame can be transformed to
a local coordinate frame using the ``to_local_coordinates`` method::

    >>> p = Point(10, 10, 10)
    >>> f1 = Frame([130, 25, 80], [1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0])
    >>> f1.to_local_coordinates(p)
    Point(-120.000, -15.000, -70.000)

Robot models
============

Robotic arms, like those typically used in digital fabrication, are fundamentally
kinematic chains of rigid bodies, i.e. **links**, connected by **joints** to
provide constrained motion. Kinematics is a subdomain of mechanics, and contrary
to dynamics, it concerns the laws of motion without considering forces.

A robot model is a set of links and joints that form a tree structure where each
joint has a coordinate frame around which it rotates or translates, depending
on the joint type.

COMPAS supports robot models defined in a standard robot description format
called ``URDF``, which originates in the ROS community.

Links
-----

Links are the rigid bodies in a robot model. They can have zero or more
geometries associated. Associated geometry can serve visual or collision purposes.
Collision geometry is generally a simplified version of visual geometry to speed up
the collision checking process.

Joints
------

Joints are the connecting elements between links. There are four main types
of joints:

* **Revolute**: A hinge joint that rotates along the axis and has a limited
  range specified by the upper and lower limits.
* **Continuous**: A hinge joint that rotates along the axis and has no limits.
* **Prismatic**: A sliding joint that slides along the axis, and has a limited
  range specified by the upper and lower limits.
* **Fixed**: Not really a joint because it cannot move, all degrees of freedom
  are locked.

Building robots models
======================

Robot models are represented by the :class:`compas.robots.RobotModel` class.
There are various ways to construct a robot model. The following snippet
shows how to construct one programmatically:

::

    >>> from compas.robots import Joint, Link, RobotModel

::

    >>> j1 = Joint('joint_1', 'revolute', parent='base', child='link_1')
    >>> j2 = Joint('joint_2', 'revolute', parent='link_1', child='link_2')
    >>> j3 = Joint('joint_3', 'revolute', parent='link_2', child='link_3')
    >>> j4 = Joint('joint_4', 'revolute', parent='link_3', child='link_4')
    >>> j5 = Joint('joint_5', 'revolute', parent='link_4', child='link_5')
    >>> j6 = Joint('joint_6', 'revolute', parent='link_5', child='link_6')
    >>> l0 = Link('base')
    >>> l1 = Link('link_1')
    >>> l2 = Link('link_2')
    >>> l3 = Link('link_3')
    >>> l4 = Link('link_4')
    >>> l5 = Link('link_5')
    >>> l6 = Link('link_6')
    >>> links = [l0, l1, l2, l3, l4, l5, l6]
    >>> joints = [j1, j2, j3, j4, j5, j6]
    >>> robot = RobotModel('johnny-5', joints=joints, links=links)
    >>> robot.get_configurable_joint_names()
    ['joint_1', 'joint_2', 'joint_3', 'joint_4', 'joint_5', 'joint_6']

This approach can end up being very verbose, so the methods ``add_link``
and ``add_joint`` of :class:`compas.robots.RobotModel` offer an alternative that
significantly reduces the amount of code required:

::

    >>> from compas.geometry import Box, Frame
    >>> from compas.datastructures import Mesh
    >>> from compas.robots import Joint, Link, RobotModel

::

    >>> length, width, axis = 5, 0.4, (0, 0, 1)
    >>> box = Box.from_diagonal([(0, width / -2, width / -2), (length, width / 2, width / 2)])
    >>> robot = RobotModel('bender')
    >>> link_last = robot.add_link('world')
    >>> robot.name
    'bender'

    >>> for i in range(6):
    ...     visual_mesh = Mesh.from_shape(box)
    ...     origin = Frame.from_quaternion((1, 0, 0, 0), point=(length, 0, 0))
    ...     link = robot.add_link('link_{}'.format(i), visual_mesh)
    ...     robot.add_joint('joint_{}'.format(i), Joint.CONTINUOUS, link_last, link, origin, axis)
    ...     link_last = link
    ...
    >>> robot.get_configurable_joint_names()
    ['joint_0', 'joint_1', 'joint_2', 'joint_3', 'joint_4', 'joint_5']

However, more often than not, robot models are loaded from URDF files instead of being
defined programmatically. To load a URDF into a robot model, use the
``from_urdf_file`` method::

    >>> model = RobotModel.from_urdf_file('ur5.urdf')
    >>> print(model)

Since a large number of robot models defined in URDF are available on Github,
there are specialized loaders that allow loading an entire model including
its linked geometry directly from a Github repository:

::

    >>> import compas
    >>> from compas.robots import GithubPackageMeshLoader
    >>> from compas.robots import RobotModel

::

    >>> # Set high precision to import meshes defined in meters
    >>> compas.PRECISION = '12f'
    >>> github = GithubPackageMeshLoader('ros-industrial/abb', 'abb_irb6600_support', 'kinetic-devel')
    >>> model = RobotModel.from_urdf_file(github.load_urdf('irb6640.urdf'))
    >>> model.load_geometry(github)
    >>> print(model)
    Robot name=abb_irb6640, Links=11, Joints=10 (6 configurable)

Another common scenario is to load robot models from a running ROS system.
`ROS (Robot Operating System) <https://www.ros.org/>`_ is a very complex and
mature tool, and its setup is beyond the scope of this tutorial, but
an overview of some of the installation options is available
`here <https://gramaziokohler.github.io/compas_fab/latest/backends/ros.html>`_.
Once ROS is configured on your system, the most convenient way to load the
robot model is to use **COMPAS FAB** and its ROS integration.
The following snippet shows how to load the robot model currently active in ROS:

::

    >>> from compas_fab.backends import RosClient

::

    >>> with RosClient() as ros:
    ...    robot = ros.load_robot(load_geometry=True)
    ...    print(robot.model)

Visualizing Robots
==================

Once a robot has been built or loaded, it can be visualized in Blender, Rhino or
Grasshopper using one of COMPAS's artists.  The basic procedure is the same in
any of the CAD software (aside from the import statement), so for simplicity we
will demonstrate the use of :class:`compas_rhino.artists.RobotModelArtist` in Rhino.  Once
COMPAS has been installed for Rhino
(see :ref:`Getting started with Rhino <cad_rhino>`),
the following can be run in a Python script editor within Rhino.

.. code-block:: python

    import compas
    from compas.robots import GithubPackageMeshLoader
    from compas.robots import RobotModel
    from compas_rhino.artists import RobotModelArtist

    compas.PRECISION = '12f'
    github = GithubPackageMeshLoader('ros-industrial/abb', 'abb_irb6600_support', 'kinetic-devel')
    model = RobotModel.from_urdf_file(github.load_urdf('irb6640.urdf'))
    model.load_geometry(github)

    artist = RobotModelArtist(model, layer='COMPAS FAB::Example')
    artist.clear_layer()
    artist.draw_visual()

FK, IK & Path Planning
======================

Robot models are the base for a large number of additional features that are
provided via extension packages. In particular, features such as
forward and inverse kinematic solvers and path planning are built on top of
these robot models, but are integrated into
`COMPAS FAB <https://gramaziokohler.github.io/compas_fab/latest/>`_.

For further details about these features, check the detailed examples in
COMPAS FAB documentation.
